Complete Kubernetes Architecture Flow

                 Control Plane
+--------------------------------------------------+
| API Server                                       |
| Scheduler                                        |
| ETCD                                             |
| Controller Manager                               |
| Cloud Controller Manager                         |
+--------------------------------------------------+
                      |
                      |
                      v
                 Worker Node
+--------------------------------------------------+
| Kubelet                                          |
| Kube-Proxy                                       |
| Container Runtime (containerd / CRI-O)           |
| Pods                                              |
+--------------------------------------------------+

Kubernetes (K8s) is a container orchestration platform used to deploy, manage, and scale containerized applications.

Kubernetes architecture mainly consists of two major components:

Control Plane (Master Node) – Responsible for managing the cluster.
Data Plane (Worker Node) – Responsible for running application workloads.

Before understanding Kubernetes architecture, let's first understand some basic Docker concepts.

When we execute a Docker container using:

docker run nginx

Docker creates and runs a container.

To run a container, Docker requires a Container Runtime. Historically, Kubernetes supported Docker through Dockershim, which acted as a bridge between Kubernetes and Docker.

A simple analogy is Java:

To run a Java application, we need a Java Runtime Environment (JRE).
Similarly, to run containers, we need a Container Runtime.

Today, Kubernetes supports multiple container runtimes such as:

CRI-O
containerd

Kubernetes uses a Container Runtime Interface (CRI), which allows it to work with different container runtimes without being tightly coupled to a specific implementation.

Kubernetes Architecture

Kubernetes architecture is divided into:

+----------------------+
|    Control Plane     |
|    (Master Node)     |
+----------------------+
           |
           |
+----------------------+
|      Worker Node     |
|      (Data Plane)    |
+----------------------+

Let's start with the Worker Node.

Data Plane (Worker Node)

The Data Plane is responsible for running application workloads inside Pods.

1. Kubelet

Kubelet is an agent that runs on every worker node.

Responsibilities:

Creates and manages Pods.
Communicates with the Control Plane.
Ensures containers are running as expected.
Reports node and pod status back to the Control Plane.

For example, if a Pod crashes, Kubelet informs the Control Plane, which can take corrective action and restart the Pod.

2. Kube-Proxy

Kube-Proxy is responsible for networking within Kubernetes.

Responsibilities:

Provides Service networking.
Enables communication between Pods.
Performs load balancing across Pods.
Manages network rules using Linux iptables or IPVS.

Without Kube-Proxy, services would not be able to route traffic to application Pods.

3. Container Runtime

The Container Runtime is responsible for running containers on worker nodes.

Common runtimes include:

containerd
CRI-O

The runtime performs tasks such as:

Pulling container images.
Starting containers.
Stopping containers.
Managing container lifecycle.

Control Plane (Master Node)

The Control Plane manages the entire Kubernetes cluster.

It decides where applications run, monitors cluster health, and maintains the desired state.
1. API Server

The API Server is the heart of Kubernetes.

Every request to Kubernetes goes through the API Server.

Examples:

kubectl get pods
kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml

Responsibilities:

Exposes Kubernetes APIs.
Validates requests.
Communicates with other control plane components.
Acts as the entry point to the cluster.

When a Pod creation request is received, the API Server processes it and coordinates with other components.

2. Scheduler

The Scheduler is responsible for deciding where a Pod should run.

Responsibilities:

Selects the most suitable worker node.
Considers CPU and memory availability.
Considers node affinity, taints, and tolerations.
Optimizes workload placement.

Note: The API Server receives the request, but the Scheduler makes the actual placement decision.


3. ETCD

ETCD is the most critical component of Kubernetes.

It is a distributed key-value store that stores the entire cluster state.

Examples of data stored in ETCD:

Pod information
Node information
Deployments
Services
Secrets
ConfigMaps

Key points:

Source of truth for the cluster.
Without ETCD, the cluster state cannot be recovered.
ETCD backups are essential for disaster recovery.


4. Controller Manager

The Controller Manager runs various Kubernetes controllers.

Responsibilities:

Ensures desired state matches actual state.
Monitors cluster resources continuously.

Example:

If a Deployment requires 3 replicas and one Pod crashes:

Desired Replicas = 3
Current Replicas = 2

The Controller Manager detects the difference and creates a new Pod to maintain the desired state.

Common controllers include:

ReplicaSet Controller
Deployment Controller
Node Controller
Endpoint Controller

5. Cloud Controller Manager (CCM)

The Cloud Controller Manager integrates Kubernetes with cloud providers.

Examples:

Amazon EKS
Azure AKS
Google GKE

Flow:

User
  ↓
Kubernetes
  ↓
Cloud Controller Manager
  ↓
AWS / Azure / GCP

Responsibilities:

Creates Load Balancers.
Provisions cloud storage.
Manages cloud networking resources.
Integrates cloud-specific services with Kubernetes.

For example, when a Service of type LoadBalancer is created in EKS:

type: LoadBalancer

The Cloud Controller Manager communicates with AWS and automatically provisions an AWS Load Balancer.

Without CCM, Kubernetes cannot create or manage cloud-native resources.
